docs/key-issues/native-dependencies/geospatial_stack.md, before:

# The Geospatial stack

Python users have a rich set of packages for geospatial data I/O, manipulation,
analytics and visualization available to them. Those include
[xarray](https://xarray.dev/),
[Shapely](https://shapely.readthedocs.io),
[Geopandas](https://geopandas.org),
[Rasterio](https://github.com/rasterio/rasterio),
[Fiona](https://github.com/Toblerity/Fiona),
[GDAL](https://gdal.org/),
[pyproj](https://github.com/pyproj4/pyproj),
[PySAL](https://pysal.org/),
[Folium](https://github.com/python-visualization/folium),
[Geoviews](https://geoviews.org/), and
[descartes](https://pypi.org/project/descartes/).
Users typically use multiple of these packages together. It has always been
difficult to set up a working Python environment for that. Especially when
installing from PyPI.


## Current state


This is the warning displayed in the Geopandas documentation
([v0.12.2 install page](https://geopandas.org/en/v0.12.2/getting_started/install.html))
for installing with `pip`:

!!! warning

    When using pip to install GeoPandas, you need to make sure that all
    dependencies are installed correctly.

    - [`fiona`](https://fiona.readthedocs.io/) provides binary wheels with the
      dependencies included for Mac and Linux, but not for Windows.
      Alternatively, you can install [`pyogrio`](https://pyogrio.readthedocs.io/)
      which does have wheels for Windows.
    - [`pyproj`](https://github.com/pyproj4/pyproj),
      [`rtree`](https://github.com/Toblerity/rtree), and
      [`shapely`](https://shapely.readthedocs.io/)
      provide binary wheels with dependencies included for Mac, Linux, and
      Windows.

    Depending on your platform, you might need to compile and install their
    C dependencies manually. We refer to the individual packages for more
    details on installing those.
    Using conda (see above) avoids the need to compile the dependencies yourself.

The description tells a clear story: there are four dependencies with native
code, *and those then have other native dependencies that may not be included*.
Why weren't those dependencies all vendored? Likely because it was simply too
hard - building for example [GDAL](https://gdal.org/) correctly is notoriously
difficult. Also, while GDAL is a large C/C++ library, it has a Python API and
*is* present on PyPI but does not provide wheels
([its PyPI project description](https://pypi.org/project/GDAL/) recommends
using conda). That brings up a question - should other packages express a
dependency on GDAL, knowing it probably won't build, or try to vendor it
in their own wheels?[^1]

[^1]:
    GDAL seems to be using the "flow of source code to distributors" function
    of PyPI here (see ["purposes of PyPI"](../../meta-topics/purposes_of_pypi.md)).
    Unofficial wheels used to be provided by
    [Christoph Gohlke on his website](https://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/#gdal).

We can use conda-forge to look at the full dependency tree for
Geopandas, which shows how many native dependencies this one pure Python
package has:

??? example "Geopandas dependency tree"

    This is the dependency tree when installing only `geopandas` from
    conda-forge (duplicate entries removed from tree):

    ```txt
    $ mamba create -n geo-env geopandas
    $ mamba activate geo-env
    $ mamba repoquery depends geopandas --tree

    geopandas[0.12.2]
      ├─ fiona[1.8.22]
      │  ├─ attrs[22.1.0]
      │  │  └─ python[3.11.0]
      │  │     ├─ bzip2[1.0.8]
      │  │     │  └─ libgcc-ng[12.2.0]
      │  │     │     ├─ _libgcc_mutex[0.1]
      │  │     │     └─ _openmp_mutex[4.5]
      │  │     │        └─ libgomp[12.2.0]
      │  │     ├─ ld_impl_linux-64[2.39]
      │  │     ├─ libffi[3.4.2]
      │  │     ├─ libnsl[2.0.0]
      │  │     ├─ libsqlite[3.40.0]
      │  │     │  └─ libzlib[1.2.13]
      │  │     ├─ libuuid[2.32.1]
      │  │     ├─ ncurses[6.3]
      │  │     ├─ openssl[3.0.7]
      │  │     │  ├─ ca-certificates[2022.12.7]
      │  │     ├─ readline[8.1.2]
      │  │     ├─ tk[8.6.12]
      │  │     ├─ tzdata[2022g]
      │  │     ├─ xz[5.2.6]
      │  │     └─ pip[22.3.1]
      │  │        ├─ setuptools[65.5.1]
      │  │        ├─ wheel[0.38.4]
      │  ├─ click[8.1.3]
      │  ├─ click-plugins[1.1.1]
      │  ├─ cligj[0.7.2]
      │  ├─ gdal[3.6.1]
      │  │  ├─ hdf5[1.12.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ libcurl[7.86.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ krb5[1.20.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ keyutils[1.6.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libedit[3.1.20191231]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libstdcxx-ng[12.2.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libnghttp2[1.47.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ c-ares[1.18.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libev[4.33]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libssh2[1.10.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ libgfortran-ng[12.2.0]
      │  │  │  │  └─ libgfortran5[12.2.0]
      │  │  ├─ libgdal[3.6.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ blosc[1.21.3]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ lz4-c[1.9.3]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ snappy[1.1.9]
      │  │  │  │  └─ zstd[1.5.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ cfitsio[4.2.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ expat[2.5.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ freexl[1.0.6]
      │  │  │  ├─ geos[3.11.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ geotiff[1.7.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ jpeg[9e]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libtiff[4.4.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ lerc[4.0.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libdeflate[1.14]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libwebp-base[1.2.4]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ proj[9.1.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  └─ sqlite[3.40.0]
      │  │  │  │  └─ zlib[1.2.13]
      │  │  │  ├─ giflib[5.2.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ hdf4[4.2.15]
      │  │  │  ├─ icu[70.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ json-c[0.16]
      │  │  │  ├─ kealib[1.5.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ libiconv[1.17]
      │  │  │  ├─ libkml[1.3.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ boost-cpp[1.78.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ libnetcdf[4.8.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ curl[7.86.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libxml2[2.10.3]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libzip[1.9.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ libpng[1.6.39]
      │  │  │  ├─ libpq[15.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ libspatialite[5.0.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ librttopo[1.1.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ openjpeg[2.5.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ pcre2[10.40]
      │  │  │  ├─ poppler[22.12.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ cairo[1.16.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ fontconfig[2.14.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ freetype[2.12.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ fonts-conda-ecosystem[1]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ fonts-conda-forge[1]
      │  │  │  │  │  │     ├─ font-ttf-dejavu-sans-mono[2.37]
      │  │  │  │  │  │     ├─ font-ttf-inconsolata[3.000]
      │  │  │  │  │  │     ├─ font-ttf-source-code-pro[2.038]
      │  │  │  │  │  │     └─ font-ttf-ubuntu[0.83]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libglib[2.74.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ gettext[0.21.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libxcb[1.13]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ pthread-stubs[0.4]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libxau[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ xorg-libxdmcp[1.1.3]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ pixman[0.40.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libice[1.0.10]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libsm[1.2.3]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libx11[1.7.2]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-kbproto[1.0.7]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ xorg-xproto[7.0.31]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libxext[1.3.4]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ xorg-xextproto[7.3.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libxrender[0.9.10]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ xorg-renderproto[0.11.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ lcms2[2.14]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ nss[3.82]
      │  │  │  │  │  └─ nspr[4.35]
      │  │  │  │  └─ poppler-data[0.4.11]
      │  │  │  ├─ postgresql[15.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ tzcode[2022g]
      │  │  │  ├─ qhull[2020.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ tiledb[2.13.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ xerces-c[3.2.4]
      │  │  ├─ numpy[1.23.5]
      │  │  │  ├─ libblas[3.9.0]
      │  │  │  │  └─ libopenblas[0.3.21]
      │  │  │  ├─ libcblas[3.9.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ liblapack[3.9.0]
      │  │  │  └─ python_abi[3.11]
      │  ├─ munch[2.5.0]
      │  │  └─ six[1.16.0]
      │  ├─ shapely[2.0.0]
      ├─ folium[0.14.0]
      │  ├─ branca[0.6.0]
      │  │  ├─ jinja2[3.1.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ markupsafe[2.1.1]
      │  └─ requests[2.28.1]
      │     ├─ certifi[2022.12.7]
      │     ├─ charset-normalizer[2.1.1]
      │     ├─ idna[3.4]
      │     └─ urllib3[1.26.13]
      │        ├─ brotlipy[0.7.0]
      │        │  ├─ cffi[1.15.1]
      │        │  │  ├─ pycparser[2.21]
      │        ├─ cryptography[38.0.4]
      │        ├─ pyopenssl[22.1.0]
      │        ├─ pysocks[1.7.1]
      ├─ geopandas-base[0.12.2]
      │  ├─ packaging[22.0]
      │  ├─ pandas[1.5.2]
      │  │  ├─ python-dateutil[2.8.2]
      │  │  └─ pytz[2022.6]
      │  ├─ pyproj[3.4.1]
      ├─ mapclassify[2.4.3]
      │  ├─ networkx[2.8.8]
      │  ├─ scikit-learn[1.2.0]
      │  │  ├─ joblib[1.2.0]
      │  │  ├─ scipy[1.9.3]
      │  │  └─ threadpoolctl[3.1.0]
      ├─ matplotlib-base[3.6.2]
      │  ├─ contourpy[1.0.6]
      │  ├─ cycler[0.11.0]
      │  ├─ fonttools[4.38.0]
      │  │  ├─ brotli[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  ├─ brotli-bin[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libbrotlidec[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libbrotlicommon[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libbrotlienc[1.0.9]
      │  │  ├─ munkres[1.1.4]
      │  ├─ kiwisolver[1.4.4]
      │  ├─ pillow[9.2.0]
      │  ├─ pyparsing[3.0.9]
      ├─ rtree[1.0.1]
      │  ├─ libspatialindex[1.9.3]
      └─ xyzservices[2022.9.0]
    ```

Building all those libraries in a consistent fashion as a set of wheels is
effectively infeasible, due to some of the "meta topics" around packaging on PyPI
([the author-led social model](../../meta-topics/pypi_social_model.md),
[lack of a build farm](../../meta-topics/no_build_farm.md)). And that's just the
tip of the iceberg. Geopandas is positioned relatively low in the stack:
[libraries.io tells us](https://libraries.io/pypi/geopandas/dependents) that it
has ~660 dependent packages on PyPI, quite a few of which are quite popular
themselves.


## Problems



## History

TODO


## Relevant resources

TODO


## Potential solutions or mitigations

The current state - the geospatial stack being almost uninstallable from PyPI,
and projects and users mostly using conda-forge - is hard to improve upon
unless some of the meta issues with PyPI that are the root causes of that
current state get addressed.

Commit message:

Finish page on key issue: the geospatial stack

docs/key-issues/native-dependencies/geospatial_stack.md, after:

# The Geospatial stack

Python users have a rich set of packages for geospatial data I/O, manipulation,
analytics and visualization available to them. Those include
[xarray](https://xarray.dev/),
[Shapely](https://shapely.readthedocs.io),
[Geopandas](https://geopandas.org),
[Rasterio](https://github.com/rasterio/rasterio),
[Fiona](https://github.com/Toblerity/Fiona),
[GDAL](https://gdal.org/),
[pyproj](https://github.com/pyproj4/pyproj),
[PySAL](https://pysal.org/),
[Folium](https://github.com/python-visualization/folium),
[Geoviews](https://geoviews.org/), and
[descartes](https://pypi.org/project/descartes/).
Users typically use multiple of these packages together. It has always been
difficult to set up a working Python environment for that. Especially when
installing from PyPI.


## Current state

The foundation for all of the Python geospatial packages are a set of native
libraries, in particular [GDAL](https://gdal.org/) (C/C++),
[PROJ](https://proj.org/index.html) (C++),
[libspatialindex](https://github.com/libspatialindex/libspatialindex) (C++), and
[libtiff](https://gitlab.com/libtiff/libtiff) (C).

These libraries are difficult to build, GDAL in particular (it has a
[long list of other native dependencies](https://gdal.org/development/building_from_source.html),
some mandatory and some optional). When there are multiple fundamental
C/C++-only libraries *and* multiple consumers of those libraries, there is a
problem. The PyPI/wheels design requires that each Python package rebuilds all
those C libraries and vendors them. This is (a) a hard job for any individual
package author, (b) requires coordination in order not to end up with different
versions of vendored libraries, and (c) a big enough hurdle in practice that
Python package authors have not been able to solve the problems.

To illustrate that, this is the warning displayed in the Geopandas documentations
([v0.12.2 install page](https://geopandas.org/en/v0.12.2/getting_started/install.html))
for installing with `pip`:

!!! warning

    When using pip to install GeoPandas, you need to make sure that all
    dependencies are installed correctly.

    - [`fiona`](https://fiona.readthedocs.io/) provides binary wheels with the
      dependencies included for Mac and Linux, but not for Windows.
      Alternatively, you can install [`pyogrio`](https://pyogrio.readthedocs.io/)
      which does have wheels for Windows.
    - [`pyproj`](https://github.com/pyproj4/pyproj),
      [`rtree`](https://github.com/Toblerity/rtree), and
      [`shapely`](https://shapely.readthedocs.io/)
      provide binary wheels with dependencies included for Mac, Linux, and
      Windows.

    Depending on your platform, you might need to compile and install their
    C dependencies manually. We refer to the individual packages for more
    details on installing those.
    Using conda (see above) avoids the need to compile the dependencies yourself.

The description tells a clear story: there are four dependencies with native
code, *and those then have other native dependencies that may not be included*.
Why weren't those dependencies all vendored? Likely because it was simply too
hard - building for example [GDAL](https://gdal.org/) correctly is notoriously
difficult. Also, while GDAL is a large C/C++ library, it has a Python API and
*is* present on PyPI but does not provide wheels
([its PyPI project description](https://pypi.org/project/GDAL/) recommends
using conda). That brings up a question - should other packages express a
dependency on GDAL, knowing it probably won't build, or try to vendor it
in their own wheels?[^1]

[^1]:
    GDAL seems to be using the "flow of source code to distributors" function
    of PyPI here (see ["purposes of PyPI"](../../meta-topics/purposes_of_pypi.md)).
    Unofficial wheels used to be provided by
    [Christoph Gohlke on his website](https://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/#gdal).

We can use conda-forge to look at the full dependency tree for
Geopandas, which shows how many native dependencies this one pure Python
package has:

??? example "Geopandas dependency tree"

    This is the dependency tree when installing only `geopandas` from
    conda-forge (duplicate entries removed from tree):

    ```txt
    $ mamba create -n geo-env geopandas
    $ mamba activate geo-env
    $ mamba repoquery depends geopandas --tree

    geopandas[0.12.2]
      ├─ fiona[1.8.22]
      │  ├─ attrs[22.1.0]
      │  │  └─ python[3.11.0]
      │  │     ├─ bzip2[1.0.8]
      │  │     │  └─ libgcc-ng[12.2.0]
      │  │     │     ├─ _libgcc_mutex[0.1]
      │  │     │     └─ _openmp_mutex[4.5]
      │  │     │        └─ libgomp[12.2.0]
      │  │     ├─ ld_impl_linux-64[2.39]
      │  │     ├─ libffi[3.4.2]
      │  │     ├─ libnsl[2.0.0]
      │  │     ├─ libsqlite[3.40.0]
      │  │     │  └─ libzlib[1.2.13]
      │  │     ├─ libuuid[2.32.1]
      │  │     ├─ ncurses[6.3]
      │  │     ├─ openssl[3.0.7]
      │  │     │  ├─ ca-certificates[2022.12.7]
      │  │     ├─ readline[8.1.2]
      │  │     ├─ tk[8.6.12]
      │  │     ├─ tzdata[2022g]
      │  │     ├─ xz[5.2.6]
      │  │     └─ pip[22.3.1]
      │  │        ├─ setuptools[65.5.1]
      │  │        ├─ wheel[0.38.4]
      │  ├─ click[8.1.3]
      │  ├─ click-plugins[1.1.1]
      │  ├─ cligj[0.7.2]
      │  ├─ gdal[3.6.1]
      │  │  ├─ hdf5[1.12.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ libcurl[7.86.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ krb5[1.20.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ keyutils[1.6.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libedit[3.1.20191231]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libstdcxx-ng[12.2.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libnghttp2[1.47.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ c-ares[1.18.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libev[4.33]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libssh2[1.10.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ libgfortran-ng[12.2.0]
      │  │  │  │  └─ libgfortran5[12.2.0]
      │  │  ├─ libgdal[3.6.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ blosc[1.21.3]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ lz4-c[1.9.3]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ snappy[1.1.9]
      │  │  │  │  └─ zstd[1.5.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ cfitsio[4.2.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ expat[2.5.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ freexl[1.0.6]
      │  │  │  ├─ geos[3.11.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ geotiff[1.7.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ jpeg[9e]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libtiff[4.4.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ lerc[4.0.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libdeflate[1.14]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libwebp-base[1.2.4]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ proj[9.1.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  └─ sqlite[3.40.0]
      │  │  │  │  └─ zlib[1.2.13]
      │  │  │  ├─ giflib[5.2.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ hdf4[4.2.15]
      │  │  │  ├─ icu[70.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ json-c[0.16]
      │  │  │  ├─ kealib[1.5.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ libiconv[1.17]
      │  │  │  ├─ libkml[1.3.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ boost-cpp[1.78.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ libnetcdf[4.8.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ curl[7.86.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libxml2[2.10.3]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libzip[1.9.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ libpng[1.6.39]
      │  │  │  ├─ libpq[15.1]
      │  │  │  ├─ libspatialite[5.0.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ librttopo[1.1.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ openjpeg[2.5.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ pcre2[10.40]
      │  │  │  ├─ poppler[22.12.0]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ cairo[1.16.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ fontconfig[2.14.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ freetype[2.12.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ fonts-conda-ecosystem[1]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ fonts-conda-forge[1]
      │  │  │  │  │  │     ├─ font-ttf-dejavu-sans-mono[2.37]
      │  │  │  │  │  │     ├─ font-ttf-inconsolata[3.000]
      │  │  │  │  │  │     ├─ font-ttf-source-code-pro[2.038]
      │  │  │  │  │  │     └─ font-ttf-ubuntu[0.83]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libglib[2.74.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ gettext[0.21.1]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libxcb[1.13]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ pthread-stubs[0.4]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libxau[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ xorg-libxdmcp[1.1.3]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ pixman[0.40.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libice[1.0.10]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libsm[1.2.3]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libx11[1.7.2]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-kbproto[1.0.7]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ xorg-xproto[7.0.31]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libxext[1.3.4]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ xorg-xextproto[7.3.0]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ xorg-libxrender[0.9.10]
      │  │  │  │  │  │  └─ xorg-renderproto[0.11.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ lcms2[2.14]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ nss[3.82]
      │  │  │  │  │  └─ nspr[4.35]
      │  │  │  │  └─ poppler-data[0.4.11]
      │  │  │  ├─ postgresql[15.1]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ tzcode[2022g]
      │  │  │  ├─ qhull[2020.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ tiledb[2.13.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ xerces-c[3.2.4]
      │  │  ├─ numpy[1.23.5]
      │  │  │  ├─ libblas[3.9.0]
      │  │  │  │  └─ libopenblas[0.3.21]
      │  │  │  ├─ libcblas[3.9.0]
      │  │  │  ├─ liblapack[3.9.0]
      │  │  │  └─ python_abi[3.11]
      │  ├─ munch[2.5.0]
      │  │  └─ six[1.16.0]
      │  ├─ shapely[2.0.0]
      ├─ folium[0.14.0]
      │  ├─ branca[0.6.0]
      │  │  ├─ jinja2[3.1.2]
      │  │  │  ├─ markupsafe[2.1.1]
      │  └─ requests[2.28.1]
      │     ├─ certifi[2022.12.7]
      │     ├─ charset-normalizer[2.1.1]
      │     ├─ idna[3.4]
      │     └─ urllib3[1.26.13]
      │        ├─ brotlipy[0.7.0]
      │        │  ├─ cffi[1.15.1]
      │        │  │  ├─ pycparser[2.21]
      │        ├─ cryptography[38.0.4]
      │        ├─ pyopenssl[22.1.0]
      │        ├─ pysocks[1.7.1]
      ├─ geopandas-base[0.12.2]
      │  ├─ packaging[22.0]
      │  ├─ pandas[1.5.2]
      │  │  ├─ python-dateutil[2.8.2]
      │  │  └─ pytz[2022.6]
      │  ├─ pyproj[3.4.1]
      ├─ mapclassify[2.4.3]
      │  ├─ networkx[2.8.8]
      │  ├─ scikit-learn[1.2.0]
      │  │  ├─ joblib[1.2.0]
      │  │  ├─ scipy[1.9.3]
      │  │  └─ threadpoolctl[3.1.0]
      ├─ matplotlib-base[3.6.2]
      │  ├─ contourpy[1.0.6]
      │  ├─ cycler[0.11.0]
      │  ├─ fonttools[4.38.0]
      │  │  ├─ brotli[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  ├─ brotli-bin[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libbrotlidec[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  │  │  ├─ libbrotlicommon[1.0.9]
      │  │  │  │  ├─ libbrotlienc[1.0.9]
      │  │  ├─ munkres[1.1.4]
      │  ├─ kiwisolver[1.4.4]
      │  ├─ pillow[9.2.0]
      │  ├─ pyparsing[3.0.9]
      ├─ rtree[1.0.1]
      │  ├─ libspatialindex[1.9.3]
      └─ xyzservices[2022.9.0]
    ```

Building all those libraries in a consistent fashion as a set of wheels is
effectively infeasible, due to some of the "meta topics" around packaging on PyPI
([the author-led social model](../../meta-topics/pypi_social_model.md),
[lack of a build farm](../../meta-topics/no_build_farm.md)). And that's just the
tip of the iceberg. Geopandas is positioned relatively low in the stack:
[libraries.io tells us](https://libraries.io/pypi/geopandas/dependents) that it
has ~660 dependent packages on PyPI, quite a few of which are quite popular
themselves.


## Problems

- The whole geospatial stack is effectively not usable from PyPI, and most
  projects and domain-specific user guides recommend using Conda.
- Multiple native libraries as a foundation requires coordination and shared
  build infrastructure.
- As a specific domain, geospatial projects have less energy/people available
  to solve problems compared to the largest projects in the PyData space.


## History

TODO


## Relevant resources

TODO


## Potential solutions or mitigations

The current state - the geospatial stack being almost uninstallable from PyPI,
and projects and users mostly using conda-forge - is hard to improve upon
unless some of the meta issues with PyPI that are the root causes of that
current state get addressed.

The most effective direction forward is probably to acknowledge that this use
case is too difficult for PyPI, and to improve the interoperability between
PyPI/Pip and system package managers.
